Front-End_ADR.md, before:

#Front-End of the App

## Status

Accepted

## Context

The front-end implementation of a web application is a key aspect and contains much of the code for a web app. Our front-end must adhere to the general object oriented principles 
and design patterns that we have been practicing during this term, thus our decisions must reflect this requirement. As we are creating an application from scratch, and as it is 
the presentation of the development teams hard work, it is important to choose the correct framework and technologies in order to achieve a design that is not only suitable 
for the application, but also highlights its features. 

## Working with jQuery, HTML, CSS, and JavaScript

In order to implement an MVC-based design pattern for structuring our user interface as part of our play web application, we chose to use jQuery as a front-end 
framework along with HTML, CSS, and JavaScript in order to achieve the design that the team envisioned. We began with creating several HTML files located in the views package to 
render the information stored in our model as well as present user requests made through our controllers into a usable and aesthetically pleasing interface. We quickly realized that
an important aspect of our web app will be the navigation menu that is located on the left side of every page. This navigation menu would allow a user to navigate with ease through the
app. Another core component of several pages of our web app is the `ObservationTable.scala.html` and panels containing form-fields, text/input-fields, buttons as well as instructions to 
guide the users work-flow. We aimed for our design to guide the user to first add an observation either by clicking the `Add Observation` button on the home page or by clicking the 
`Add Observation` navigation panel in the navigation menu. From here, a user shall then create an observation through the `Create Observation` form that we drafted up using Scala Form Helpers.
Once an observation is created, a user will be redirected to a page containing that Observation Table as well as the `whaleForm.scala.html` that is used to handle the whales the user
will create. We chose to have each whale be presented as a card deck, with each "card" (whale) showing an image of that whale's species, its gender, estimated weight, and ID in order to visually 
see all entered whales. 

We created numerous templates for different interface elements. In order to make the site as composable as possible,
UI blocks were separated into smaller pieces so that they could be used on multiple pages. The consistent look and feel
of the site is achieved by making every page ultimately render `htmlHeader.scala.html` with the content section
being passed as a constructor parameter. Using Scala functional interfaces meant that it is easy to make repeated data.
As an example of this, the table of whales is generated by flat mapping observations and whales into tuples which can
then be mapped into a Twirl template which uses the appropriate file to visually render the information.




We decided to use [Bootstrap](https://getbootstrap.com/ to enhance the look and feel of our page. The side navigation
pane allows users to quickly find where they need to go. The folding feature is very useful on mobile where horizontal
screen space is very limited. The use of CSS @Media queries helped us to build more responsive designs with smaller
sized cards to fit on mobile devices.


jQuery was used to enhance the functionality of the web app by adding plugins to the front end to aid use experience and error
handling. The first feature we implemented was table sorting. Using the [tablesorter plugin](https://mottie.github.io/tablesorter/docs/)
we added the ability for users sort both tables containing info on Observations and Whales by whichever field was desired.
This is critical for users to aggregate data and to find things quickly. While searching is useful, sorting by date is
far more likely to yield critical insights into the data. 

jQuery was also used to parse the local date fields. There is an input of type datetime-local but it is not supported in
Firefox. In order to ensure cross browser compatibility, we went with the W3C recommended solution of using the 
[pickadate](https://www.jqueryscript.net/time-clock/Lightweight-jQuery-Date-Input-Picker.html) api to ensure cross
browser support for date entry. One of the primary reasons to use a plugin instead of just accepting text for the date
was to ensure that the dates would be returned to the server in a reliable format. This means that we can always expect
dates in YYYY/MM/DD HH:MM format and parse them accordingly.

Javascript key event handling was a key component of validating user input. Particularly for the Whale form. For the 
whale entry form, drop down menus were used to ensure that the input to the system would match one of the enums in the
model. However, for the estimated weight, we wanted to ensure that the value was greater than or equal to 0. Unlike the
observation for which has room to expand vertically and print error messages, there was no space within a Whale card.
As such, on keypress the field is validated. If the field only contains a positive integer then the submit button
is activated. If it does not, then the field is greyed out until it is valid. One interesting bug occurred when a user
would type a letter and press enter simultaneously. In this case, we added extra javascript before the form could submit.
This ensures that even if an extraneous submit event fires with bad text it will be rejected, and the button will be greyed out.

One task we completed was using minified javascript wherever possible to save bandwidth and compressing all
the images on the site to as small as possible. This improves response times on the page which is important for user
satisfaction. 

## Consequences

Using jQuery makes it much easier to have external plugins add functionality to the website. In the future, we would like
to add google maps API functionality to the locations, so that users locations can be more easily collated into useful
results by making queries such as filtering by a radius. Using form validation on the client side reduces the need for
time-consuming server calls, especially in the cases where clients may be on mobile with low data rates.

## Challenges and Recommendations
There were a number of challenging aspects to the front end implementation of the app. Working through the flow as
presented earlier was one but in many ways the most challenging aspect was the ratio of time spent debugging the HTML
just to test that it all worked correctly. Changing CSS was a fairly slow process as it was new to most of us. We often
found it challenging to balance our time between small graphics updates, which took a long time and larger structural changes,
which often took the same amount of time. 

One other area that we found challenging and would like to spend more time was mobile design. Our website primarily has
been optimised for desktop devices because that is our development and testing environment. However, after using our
phones and the Google Chrome simulated phone testing tools, there are some functionality improvements to be made. 
It would be nice to have more responsive tables on mobile, perhaps even reducing the number of rows so that they could
be read more easily. We ran the Lighthouse automated test tool for our website and scored and 88 on localhost.
This is not ideal. Some recommendations include removing all downloaded external plugins so that cached versions
on client machines can be accessed instead. We would like to make this change but have not in order to ensure that the
website can run fully localhost without any internet dependencies. 

In the future, we would like to run the javascript through Node.js to generate a single minified script that contains
only the functions that we need. This will further reduce the download size of the app.

Commit message:

More details on JS and CSS

Front-End_ADR.md, after:

#Front-End of the App

## Status

Accepted

## Context

The front-end implementation of a web application is a key aspect and contains much of the code for a web app. Our front-end must adhere to the general object oriented principles 
and design patterns that we have been practicing during this term, thus our decisions must reflect this requirement. As we are creating an application from scratch, and as it is 
the presentation of the development teams hard work, it is important to choose the correct framework and technologies in order to achieve a design that is not only suitable 
for the application, but also highlights its features. 

## Working with jQuery, HTML, CSS, and JavaScript

In order to implement an MVC-based design pattern for structuring our user interface as part of our play web application, we chose to use jQuery as a front-end 
framework along with HTML, CSS, and JavaScript in order to achieve the design that the team envisioned. We began with creating several HTML files located in the views package to 
render the information stored in our model as well as present user requests made through our controllers into a usable and aesthetically pleasing interface. We quickly realized that
an important aspect of our web app will be the navigation menu that is located on the left side of every page. This navigation menu would allow a user to navigate with ease through the
app. Another core component of several pages of our web app is the `ObservationTable.scala.html` and panels containing form-fields, text/input-fields, buttons as well as instructions to 
guide the users work-flow. We aimed for our design to guide the user to first add an observation either by clicking the `Add Observation` button on the home page or by clicking the 
`Add Observation` navigation panel in the navigation menu. From here, a user shall then create an observation through the `Create Observation` form that we drafted up using Scala Form Helpers.
Once an observation is created, a user will be redirected to a page containing that Observation Table as well as the `whaleForm.scala.html` that is used to handle the whales the user
will create. We chose to have each whale be presented as a card deck, with each "card" (whale) showing an image of that whale's species, its gender, estimated weight, and ID in order to visually 
see all entered whales. 

We created numerous templates for different interface elements. In order to make the site as composable as possible,
UI blocks were separated into smaller pieces so that they could be used on multiple pages. The consistent look and feel
of the site is achieved by making every page ultimately render `htmlHeader.scala.html` with the content section
being passed as a constructor parameter. Using Scala functional interfaces meant that it is easy to make repeated data.
As an example of this, the table of whales is generated by flat mapping observations and whales into tuples which can
then be mapped into a Twirl template which uses the appropriate file to visually render the information.


We decided to use [Bootstrap](https://getbootstrap.com/ to enhance the look and feel of our page. The side navigation
pane allows users to quickly find where they need to go. The folding feature is very useful on mobile where horizontal
screen space is very limited. The use of CSS @Media queries helped us to build more responsive designs with smaller
sized cards to fit on mobile devices.


jQuery was used to enhance the functionality of the web app by adding plugins to the front end to aid use experience and error
handling. The first feature we implemented was table sorting. Using the [tablesorter plugin](https://mottie.github.io/tablesorter/docs/)
we added the ability for users sort both tables containing info on Observations and Whales by whichever field was desired.
This is critical for users to aggregate data and to find things quickly. While searching is useful, sorting by date is
far more likely to yield critical insights into the data. 

jQuery was also used to parse the local date fields. There is an input of type datetime-local but it is not supported in
Firefox. In order to ensure cross browser compatibility, we went with the W3C recommended solution of using the 
[pickadate](https://www.jqueryscript.net/time-clock/Lightweight-jQuery-Date-Input-Picker.html) api to ensure cross
browser support for date entry. One of the primary reasons to use a plugin instead of just accepting text for the date
was to ensure that the dates would be returned to the server in a reliable format. This means that we can always expect
dates in YYYY/MM/DD HH:MM format and parse them accordingly.

Javascript key event handling was a key component of validating user input. Particularly for the Whale form. For the 
whale entry form, drop down menus were used to ensure that the input to the system would match one of the enums in the
model. However, for the estimated weight, we wanted to ensure that the value was greater than or equal to 0. Unlike the
observation for which has room to expand vertically and print error messages, there was no space within a Whale card.
As such, on keypress the field is validated. If the field only contains a positive integer then the submit button
is activated. If it does not, then the field is greyed out until it is valid. One interesting bug occurred when a user
would type a letter and press enter simultaneously. In this case, we added extra javascript before the form could submit.
This ensures that even if an extraneous submit event fires with bad text it will be rejected, and the button will be greyed out.

One last javascript feature was implementing the API into the API documentation page. The page fires both a valid and invalid
ajax request to demonstrate the live results of the current whales. This is useful for potential users to clearly undertstand
how the data will be presented.

One task we completed was using minified javascript wherever possible to save bandwidth and compressing all
the images on the site to as small as possible. This improves response times on the page which is important for user
satisfaction. 

## Consequences

Using jQuery makes it much easier to have external plugins add functionality to the website. In the future, we would like
to add google maps API functionality to the locations, so that users locations can be more easily collated into useful
results by making queries such as filtering by a radius. Using form validation on the client side reduces the need for
time-consuming server calls, especially in the cases where clients may be on mobile with low data rates.

Using Bootstrap as a UI theme means that we are able to have cohesive looking designs. However, it does limit some
flexibility because it can be hard to override default settings in instances where that is necessary.

Performing server side filtering means that it can be somewhat slower to process large quanities of data repeated than
using javascript. In the future, it might be a more robust solution to filter data in javascript. Once the entire dataset
has been rendered once then it could be analyzed for a given session. However, this would likely require preiodic AJAX requests
to ensure tha data was current.

## Challenges and Recommendations
One thing we wrestled with was the flow of entering whales. One issue is the fact that often we are only interested
entering whales of one species for an observation. In this paradigm you might enter the species and how many were seen.
The issue then was adding the specific data like weight to each whale. We decided that it would be less likely for users
to enter incorrect data if they only added records one at a time. This prevents them from accidentally modifying the
same whale twice and never setting critical information on the final one.

There were a number of challenging aspects to the front end implementation of the app. Working through the flow as
presented earlier was one but in many ways the most challenging aspect was the ratio of time spent debugging the HTML
just to test that it all worked correctly. Changing CSS was a fairly slow process as it was new to most of us. We often
found it challenging to balance our time between small graphics updates, which took a long time and larger structural changes,
which often took the same amount of time. 

One other area that we found challenging and would like to spend more time was mobile design. Our website primarily has
been optimised for desktop devices because that is our development and testing environment. However, after using our
phones and the Google Chrome simulated phone testing tools, there are some functionality improvements to be made. 
It would be nice to have more responsive tables on mobile, perhaps even reducing the number of rows so that they could
be read more easily. We ran the Lighthouse automated test tool for our website and scored and 88 on localhost.
This is not ideal. Some recommendations include removing all downloaded external plugins so that cached versions
on client machines can be accessed instead. We would like to make this change but have not in order to ensure that the
website can run fully localhost without any internet dependencies. 

In the future, we would like to run the javascript through Node.js to generate a single minified script that contains
only the functions that we need. This will further reduce the download size of the app.
